John Ellis: Don't follow me, follow her!
John Ellis: I stay muted.
John Ellis: Yes. And then, amazing. Okay, then I can just share my face.
John Ellis: You just share your screens.
John Ellis: Alright, you're good. There we go.
John Ellis: I mean, it would be interesting. Yeah, I don't like this. All right, great, and if you're ready to project…
John Ellis: All right, folks, we're gonna start off our, our, got our next session, started, with, Abby Pigilante. Abby Pigilante is a, postdoctoral researcher with the, Data Science Institute at the College of Connected Computing.
John Ellis: your PhD work was actually in astronomy, and you did really nice work in modeling. Now, was that on dark matter?
John Ellis: Yes. Yeah, so it was on, evolution of, of, galaxies and, and large-scale structures of, sarah, remember, I was on your… Yes. Sarah, remember this. but now as a specialist in, in, in AI,
John Ellis: And in particular with a special expertise within small language models and reinforcement learning and the alignment that we were talking about before, but today she's going to be talking about defining AI augmented academic projects. Let me go ahead and have you minimize that right there so we can, see more of the screen.
John Ellis: And you can just sort of… oh, I should sit still.
John Ellis: We'll get right here, and then you do that.
John Ellis: Just put it over.
John Ellis: Thank you, Abby!
John Ellis: Okay. Hi, everyone. And I apologize that
John Ellis: smallest amount of the bottom of the screen is chopped off. I'm hoping that will not matter for anything, but it might, and if it does, I will tell you what is, down there that gets cut off.
John Ellis: But yes, I have been a postdoc at the Data Science Institute for three and a half years at this point, which means I have had the opportunity to work on lots of different projects, sort of across all sorts of domains. A lot of times, my job involves just working with a researcher who comes to us with data, and I've never worked in that domain before, and I have no idea what that data is.
John Ellis: how it's supposed to look. And so, I have a lot of experience on
John Ellis: Defining research projects, understanding what it is that you have to know, what is the domain expertise that you need, what is the production expertise that you need.
John Ellis: And so hopefully today I will be able to transfer a bit of that into sort of, meaningful and concrete takeaways for, let's say you have a project and you want to ask yourself, like.
John Ellis: is this a good fit for AI? How can you figure that out? Where are places where that could go wrong? And where are places where maybe we can correct if there are opportunities to go wrong that we can anticipate?
John Ellis: Cheers.
John Ellis: So… Okay.
John Ellis: So, this is maybe a pipeline that everybody has experienced at some point. Probably this was a lot more common of a pipeline back in, kind of, the earlier days, maybe where ChatGPT was like ChatGPT3, and it wasn't that good at stuff. We're sort of…
John Ellis: you have some sort of task, and you think, oh wow, AI is this awesome thing, let me see if it can do it. You stick it into whatever your preferred state-of-the-art model is, and then it…
John Ellis: just works at it, and it gives you something back. And usually, this leads to one or two… one of two things, which are both
John Ellis: terrible pitfalls to me, which is that it seems like it does a really good job at one pass, and you go, awesome, my work is done.
John Ellis: And you ship it. And if you follow people on TikTok and social media who claim that they're software engineers, they would make you believe that this is their main workflow, is that they don't check anything, and they just have AI write code for them, and then they ship it.
John Ellis: But maybe you realize the imperfections in this thing, or it's absolutely riddled with imperfections. You asked AI to do something for you, and it did a really bad job of it.
John Ellis: And then you just kind of go, like, okay, well, I don't know how I'm supposed to fix it, and then you give up on the task, because now it's too much work to even do it with AI.
John Ellis: And neither of those outcomes is what we want when we're doing work, and AI is supposed to be accelerating that work, helping us with that work. But they're both kind of very realistic.
John Ellis: naive approaches to using AI. Now, obviously, we've heard a lot today about better ways to use AI, so everybody here probably knows better than taking two of these naive approaches, but still, it remains kind of a common way of interacting with stuff.
John Ellis: So to make it kind of more concrete, here's a very.
John Ellis: realistic research project that I have worked on, and I've been working on for several years because it seemed like a thing that was going to be really obvious for AI to help us with.
John Ellis: And even now, state-of-the-art models don't make this so simple. So the task that we had is that we had children's books. Lots of images.
John Ellis: text pages from children's books, and we wanted to have an AI create reading comprehension questions, but a very particular type of reading comprehension questions that sort of
John Ellis: Have a child better relate.
John Ellis: the content on the page to their life, better understand what's going on. It's called dialogic reading.
John Ellis: And this might seem really simple at first, so if you just go to an AI and you say, like, give me a dialogic reading question for this page, it might be kind of hard to see, but both Claude and GPT will give a question that reads like a question, so you think, okay, awesome.
John Ellis: If you read these a little bit more closely, or you've ever kind of worked with… not that I have, but from what I understand through all of my journey on this project, if you've ever worked with 3-5 year old children, you might read those questions and think, are those quite right for that age range for reading comprehension?
John Ellis: And the answer is no, and it turned out that, when we did this, even though we got questions that kind of seemed very reasonable.
John Ellis: Usually, like, 50% of them were bad, so then we said, okay, well, this is a prompting problem, right? We just haven't explained enough what we mean by a question, and so we went back.
John Ellis: And we tried to give it every sort of guidance we could possibly think of how to make a really good dialogic reading question, and still.
John Ellis: about… we got 80% quality on state-of-the-art models when we tried really, really hard. And there were other problems that we discovered. Like, even when questions were generally good, then they would start to really lack diversity. They were basically all the same question over and over again. So, like, yeah, you made that one good question, now you give it to me constantly, and that's not what I want.
John Ellis: And so, all of this is just to highlight that it's not that AI is bad at all, but that there's a lot that needs to be considered when you're trying to use AI in, like, real production and real research questions, and you, all of you here, have your own expertise and understanding and knowledge about what
John Ellis: actually is good, and if you're the one who can look at those scrapbooks and be like, that's not what I want, how do I need it to be better? And all of that, and that's, where, really, your interaction with AI is going to be the most value.
John Ellis: So I've definitely felt that it feels like this sometimes, that I'm asking AI to do things for me, and it's just giving me a bunch of stuff that's messed up, and I get really mad at it. It gives me citations that don't actually exist, and then I think, oh, now I just gotta go do the literature review.
John Ellis: Or it gives me data analysis results that look right and have all the right statistics, until I realize it's because it hard-coded something, because it knew the answer already, and it didn't actually do any of the work that I wanted it to do.
John Ellis: Or I'm sitting there brainstorming, I think I've got a great idea, and it goes, yeah, that is a genius idea. Then later, I found the paper where somebody already did that, are you telling me it's a good idea?
John Ellis: So, I think there's times where it can feel like this wall is, like, overwhelming, but I think the reality is that
John Ellis: AI is genuinely incredible. I really do believe that, as much as I'm kind of
John Ellis: slandering it, how I made GPT slander itself by making a homage.
John Ellis: But the reality is that it can accelerate your research tremendously when you put in your own expertise and take the care to use it really, really well. And so, it can do all of these things for you.
John Ellis: It can totally accelerate everything you're doing, but you have to anticipate what are the things that are going to go wrong, try to identify them ahead of time, bake in your expertise where it might not know it, and really guide it in the right direction.
John Ellis: And I think that research in particular, is an interesting case for this, because
John Ellis: I just said AI is incredible, and that's true, but AI is, in my opinion, equally as incredible as real research is really difficult and hard. That real research wants things that are difficult for AI to just do without any extra guidance. It wants
John Ellis: absolute correctness and reproducibility, and all of the edge cases to be covered, and novelty, and not a single error, because that will propagate through the pipeline and be catastrophic. And AI isn't really, as we saw, necessarily optimized towards all of those things.
John Ellis: That being said, there's a ton that lives in the middle, and there's a ton of, sort of.
John Ellis: compromise space, I would say, that you could make, where, maybe AI can't do the whole thing for you, but it can do a component, and a big part, sort of, using AI is realizing what is that component that it can do for me, that it can help with, and where is that space
John Ellis: So one more analogy, that I really like, and maybe this will sort of help you frame it, is that, I think AI helps bridge a gap
John Ellis: But if it bridges it, it doesn't fly a cane over it. So, if you have some sort of expertise, and you want to move to some problem space, or solve some issue, or do some task where your expertise is relevant, where you've well defined the problem.
John Ellis: AI might help take you there, build a little bridge over to, like, I needed to write this other thing that I didn't know how to do.
John Ellis: But enough of what I know is relevant to get me there. The issue is if you want AI to fly a plane through you over the ocean, you have this task that you really want to do, and you can't well define it because you don't have the relevant expertise, can't evaluate it, because you wouldn't know what would go wrong.
John Ellis: AI will certainly try, but it'll probably give you something really bad, and then you are left with not knowing how you're supposed to progress.
John Ellis: And so, I think that really this is the…
John Ellis: horror story that you'll hear about repeatedly with AI. I know that I've heard about it tons of times with regards to, for instance, like, programmed websites that then had
John Ellis: terrible security and, like, people's critical data, stuff like that, is that
John Ellis: AI is amazing when it closes a production gap for when you already have the evaluation expertise. So, I very much come from a coding side, so for me, this is always the example where it's like, when I know what a code is supposed to do, and what I want it to do, and I could write it myself.
John Ellis: But I don't want to take the time, so I'll have AI write it, but I can still… I know everything about whether or not it's doing what it's supposed to. Where it's very dangerous is where you wouldn't have any way of knowing if what it did was
John Ellis: accurate, or robust, or anything, and then it just does it for you, and you can't properly evaluate it. And so a lot of those horror stories here live in this bottom section, where somebody just said, like, I don't know, it must work because AI's brilliant, and then can't really figure out
John Ellis: Where it went wrong.
John Ellis: And I think I don't have to tell anybody in this room about the importance of, academic rigor, but I think that the point really to make here is that the failures in AI are gonna be kind of…
John Ellis: different. And I hope to really enumerate all of them so that, you know, you know what to anticipate. But I think that
John Ellis: you know, everyone here is probably used to running evaluations and tests and understanding where your results fail and where they don't, but AI will have ways of failing that I think are less obvious, and that's kind of where it gets a little scary.
John Ellis: One big thing is that I think a lot of times the signal that something is wrong is just not there at all. Like.
John Ellis: again, in my domain, which is, like, usually coding, we are well past the point where AI code will ever have a syntactical error in it, you know what I mean? Or if it does, like, it'll just fix it.
John Ellis: So the problem isn't going to be this, like, error that pits you in the face that the code can't run. The problem is going to be, like, something that it hard-coded on line 27 that actually, like, messes up the whole analysis.
John Ellis: And you maybe wouldn't know what the signs are to know that that's in there, and that the whole thing's wrong. Or, bad AI writing? I mean, it reads great.
John Ellis: Like, it'll sound like it totally knows what it's talking about, or it'll give you citations that don't exist. And so it's not obvious where it's making space, so we have to be a little more methodological in picking apart where it's going to make space.
John Ellis: In this way, it's also inverting the normal cost structure in a way that, for me, felt really frustrating for a while, but I think now I'm used to, where,
John Ellis: you know, I'm very used to, like, I put in all of this hard work to write a really long code, or, like, produce something myself, and then once it's working, I feel really confident in writing it. So then, like, you know, running evaluations and tests and producing, like, thoughts that show the results on top of that.
John Ellis: is a little bit less of the work. You know, like, the hard work was making sure it was all perfect from the get-go. Instead, it gets a little bit inverted with AI. So, like, you can have something really, really fast.
John Ellis: And then all of the hard work comes around checking that it's really good, it's really doing what you want it to do, and so you have to, like, think about where you're putting your time a little bit differently.
John Ellis: And then, of course, AI can explain to you what it's thinking.
John Ellis: And that can be useful, but it also can fall into the same trap. So…
John Ellis: I love to read, like, Claude's thinking process, but a lot of times, Claude's thinking process is, like, the same thing as what it ends up telling me, so you can't necessarily 100% rely on what it thinks it's thinking to arrive at your answer to really arrive at your answer. Sometimes.
John Ellis: that's, like, way baked into, yeah, the model's understanding of things, to the context from forever ago that you kind of didn't realize it's accounting for. And so you can't necessarily just ask it why it's doing the things it's doing. We'll always…
John Ellis: Okay, so before I sort of, enumerate
John Ellis: what, in my mind, are kind of the main things to be looking out for. I want to sort of just call out what I mean by using AI in research, because it can mean a lot of things, and I think really all of these apply. It's sort of
John Ellis: it exists, how to use AI in research kind of exists across the full spectrum of ways that you could do this. So the first thing is that AI might be your information processor. Maybe you're feeding it
John Ellis: You know, 100 documents about something, and you're asking it to synthesize that information.
John Ellis: Or, you're giving it 100 Excel sheets and asking for it to, like, aggregate some information. So it's mostly…
John Ellis: Turning a bulk of stuff into, like, a single output.
John Ellis: Of course, AI can be a writing slash thinking partner. You can use it to help draft.
John Ellis: Write certain things, brainstorm with you, synthesize multiple papers that you are having trouble understanding how they relate to one another.
John Ellis: all of that. Ai is your programmer, so this is my personal mode, but I know it's not everybody's, where, for the most part, what AI is doing is just not putting, you know, Python files for you. You say, hey, I need a file that does this, goes and writes it, it's back with it, or…
John Ellis: you know, whatever, whatever the code… the problem is code-based, and you're sort of just asking for a certain thing in that way. The fourth mode…
John Ellis: This AI is the thing that you're building, so there are cases in which maybe fine-tuning a model is a part of the work.
John Ellis: that you're doing, and I still think the same source of considerations actually, you know, come into play if, like, that is the case. Because even if you fine-tune the model, it doesn't mean you understand absolutely everything about, sort of, the now.
John Ellis: personal black box that you fine-tuned. So the same amount of, like, evaluation and rigor should go into that application as well.
John Ellis: Okay.
John Ellis: So I have tried to define
John Ellis: five major pressure points. Places that I think that
John Ellis: really have to be vigilant about, keep an eye out, places where I think that there might,
John Ellis: be an opportunity for things to not go exactly quite right when you try to use AI in research. But then hopefully, some places where also you might be able to mitigate these from the get-go, know what could go wrong, and then use that to your advantage.
John Ellis: Okay.
John Ellis: So the first one I'm calling the invisible decision.
John Ellis: And this is the problem that I think personally bothers me the most, and that I run into kind of the most, which is that AI will make choices
John Ellis: That you didn't ask for, and it won't tell you that it's making choices.
John Ellis: And this can be across a very broad range of things. If you have a particular mode that you've immediately identified how you want to, use AI in research, one of these modes might resonate with you. Not gonna enumerate all of them, because that would take a lot of time.
John Ellis: But the idea of having an invisible decision problem is that there's times in which you will think that you are fully specifying a problem to AI. You want to use this certain methodology, you want it to write Python code, you want it to take in inputs in this format and give out outputs in this format, and
John Ellis: All of that you've splayed out really well, and yet still, it will decide to use a particular algorithm to make a certain assumption about your data distribution, to whatever it is, and it won't necessarily tell you.
John Ellis: I can,
John Ellis: rant all day about this problem that I have, but I've had repeatedly in AI, so I'll call it out as the one that, I run into all the time. Every time that I ask AI to write
John Ellis: A code to do fine-tuning of a model.
John Ellis: It's getting into the nitty-gritty, but it'll do that gradient descent step, that, like, fixing how it's going to make outputs based on what it's already done. It'll do that based also on the input prompt.
John Ellis: And that's just, like, fundamentally not how you do that, and I don't think I have to say that, but I do have to say that. And it took… the first time this happened.
John Ellis: It took me a really long time, like, a lot of debugging, a lot of, like, loss plots, and, like, looking at the token, like, so much debugging. Because, again, like, there's no error.
John Ellis: The trainings aren't wrong. Actually, the loss plots will come down beautifully, they look totally fine, except that it's a fundamental flaw that I think is obvious.
John Ellis: But that isn't obvious to the AI.
John Ellis: And so these can be really hard to catch. I guess this is why I'm saying I could rant about it, because they really are invisible.
John Ellis: And it takes a lot of expertise sometimes to know when things are going well, and to tease them out.
John Ellis: But the hope is that you can make at least some of those decisions visible to you. So one thing is always just to, like.
John Ellis: ask AI to state its assumptions before executing. I know that I said earlier that asking AI to say what it's gonna do is not always the perfect solution, but make it right a plan. What are the steps? What…
John Ellis: you know, like, what are all the assumptions it's making about things? How does it plan on tackling this? What in its mind is the code doing? Or are the key points it's making in your PowerPoint or your document? And then just look at all of it and sanity check it all first. Just like, well, is that how I would have done anything?
John Ellis: sort of going along with that, but I think sort of separate.
John Ellis: As much as you can, try to write
John Ellis: constraints on choices. Like, if there… now, I know that I said the invisible decision problem is invisible because you can't anticipate what would have happened, but still.
John Ellis: it's a good idea to try to, like, splay out what you do know about a problem as well as you do beforehand. The more information that you can bake in, and the more of your knowledge about how you want this done, you can bake in.
John Ellis: The less it'll have to just kind of freeball it.
John Ellis: And a lot of times, just treat the first pass
John Ellis: as a draft of the decision-making process. So if you can, start with a smaller version of a task.
John Ellis: or, like, a pilot version, or, like, a snippet of something, if you think that there's a lot of opportunity for choices to be made there, that helps a lot. So, if you're just, like, writing a massive code.
John Ellis: maybe AI could give you the whole thing in one go, but maybe you want, like, one specific part, you, like, want to look at that.
John Ellis: Actually. And just check all the decisions that go into that. So you don't have to be meticulous about every single part of everything you do. I think it's about understanding what parts to be meticulous over, and that starts from you understanding what are the decisions that you could make that would mess this whole thing up, and let me try to catch those before they…
John Ellis: A second major one that I think is probably, one of the most, sort of, well understood if you've worked with AI is the plausibility track, which is just that, things will… won't approximately bigger. So we talked about this, that, like.
John Ellis: things will read well, or citations will look well-structured, or the code will run and won't have errors. Like, all of these things happen. And, the way to know if things are actually going wrong, is to really just have to
John Ellis: look at what it's doing, which I know sounds really obvious, but just…
John Ellis: calling it out anyway, because we all know it happens. Really, you can't just blindly trust
John Ellis: AI when it comes to a lot of things, and that it has to be your job to say, well, is there a test case that I know that I can try this out on? And that test case will inform to me if it's really doing what I think
John Ellis: it's doing. Or identify what your edge cases are. So if you give it lots of examples that are super easy, maybe it does a wonderful job on the easy examples, but do you have a case where you know if it doesn't get the edge case, it actually didn't get the methodology really right, and then look at the edge cases.
John Ellis: verified claims independently, so if…
John Ellis: don't make an assumption that because it performs well in one case, or because it performs well in easy cases, that things are necessarily going well. So for me, this
John Ellis: still happens with citations, even when I ask it to, like, go and check the citations. Sometimes, like, 9 of 10 of them are right. You know, I still don't look at every single one of papers that it tells me are relevant to what I'm looking at, because it's just…
John Ellis: It's just that all those things are independent from one another, so you can't necessarily know that because one was right, universally, they're right.
John Ellis: Another sort of big one, is the evaluation gap. This is basically the case where
John Ellis: Sometimes it happens that you want to use AI to do something for you, and you sort of run into this wall where actually you realize that figuring out if the AI did a good job of it is more work than you could have just done living yourself.
John Ellis: Like, AI is maybe formatting some things wrong, and all of a sudden you don't trust the whole batch of those things, and you try to correct it, and, like, it's still not doing it right, and now you think, like, I just gotta do it myself, because now, how do I know what's going on with any of this?
John Ellis: I think that this is an opportunity, and there's lots of opportunities for, stuff like skills and agents to help kind of bridge some of these gaps. I think this is an opportunity there, to sort of
John Ellis: leverage your expertise, and to make sure that your expertise is known to the model as best as you can. So…
John Ellis: Really, it means critically looking at what evaluation means for your project, and can you give that insight that you have about what evaluation means to the model, so that it can understand what sorts of evaluations to run ahead of time?
John Ellis: And so this can be, yeah, like, running… writing skills to run certain test cases. Like, there's well-known tests that have to pass on your data for it to be right, like.
John Ellis: give that to the model so it knows to check these things for you. Sometimes the evaluation gap, I think, can feel enormous, and a lot of the work is in, like, closing it by helping the area understand
John Ellis: what it's supposed to be doing. A lot of this also just happens
John Ellis: when you try to scope ahead of time, so understanding, like, what is the complexity of the problem, can I anticipate some of these errors, or…
John Ellis: places where it'll go wrong, or evaluations that it's gonna have to run, and just tell it to run them from the get-go.
John Ellis: And then, of course, ask yourself if you could just figure it out if you had to, and if you did have to go down that path, like, would this whole thing have been a waste of your time? Is, I think, just an important question to keep in your mind, if, like, AI is meant to make things easier for you, and if it would potentially make things worse for you.
John Ellis: And maybe just let that help go.
John Ellis: Okay.
John Ellis: lots of these potential issues. The next one is the aggregation effect. I think that this one, is also fairly well known, which is just kind of that there can be significant
John Ellis: errors or bias over lots of model outputs. So where a single instance looks okay, you might actually have a really bad systematic issue once you look at a thousand examples of something.
John Ellis: Of course, the easiest thing is always just to check the distribution, check lots of use cases.
John Ellis: Sample strategically, not necessarily randomly, so it goes a little bit back to the point of if you have edge cases, it's always best to understand
John Ellis: Where… to anticipate where there is an opportunity to not be getting the full picture, or the generalized picture, and then try to take that apart from the get-go.
John Ellis: Of course, if you are able to take statistics, look at them over all of your data, if you can, or as much of your data as you can. And then, of course, just ask yourselves, like, what are the biases that are acceptable?
John Ellis: There are real instances where there could be some errors or biases in a pipeline, and that is okay for some reason, as long as they're well known and well characterized.
John Ellis: I have a good example of one of these. So, I looked at the emails that I generated last night that you all just got.
John Ellis: And and it looks fine. And Jesse Bloper was the last person who connected to the person that… let me open another email.
John Ellis: The last person who's connected for this person was
John Ellis: Jesse Bloker. Yeah. And then I opened up a random third one, and guess who was the third person who was listening? Jesse Bloker. So, so it was the Jesse Bloker bias effect that, that didn't appear until I actually looked at a number of them to see that there was indeed a problem with the distribution. Yes.
John Ellis: Definitely, yes. And Jesse Bolt, I'm sure, is a great person to talk to with, not for…
John Ellis: At the same time.
John Ellis: Okay, and then the final, point is, just the cost delusion, which is sort of an aggregate point of all of these others, which is that sometimes you anticipate that AI will save you time, and enough of these issues means that it saves you time. And to the best of your ability.
John Ellis: Anticipating this is nice. Now, it's not always possible. Sometimes it really just
John Ellis: does take more of your time than you realize, and you kind of stick with it, or sometimes, you know, like, the time's just lost. But I try to really ask myself. I'm completely guilty of
John Ellis: using Claude to write all of my emails. I just really don't like writing emails. It really stresses me out. I think I'm, like, obsessed over the wording, so I have Claude write my emails.
John Ellis: Now, I cannot tell you how many times it's taken me an hour to write an email, because I go back and forth with Claude about, like, well, I don't know, are they going to interpret this that way? Like, that sounds like… am I being rude if I said… I could have written the email myself at that point.
John Ellis: So I've learned that buying personal
John Ellis: thing is that I shouldn't use Cloud to write my emails, because my obsessiveness is gonna make that a problem. But there are real cases where it's not your own obsessiveness, it's, you know.
John Ellis: that having to specify 200 things about exactly how the data should look, like, maybe you should have just gone in and, like, edited something, you know what I mean? There's lots of cases where the best thing to do is try a pilot, and if it seems like things are taking too much work.
John Ellis: sometimes it's just that AI would take too much work. Like, you'd have to over-specify, especially if it's, like, a one single instance, like.
John Ellis: there's one thing to put in a lot of work to, like, write a scale or a code that's going to be really reusable to you, but if you're trying to, like, just make one single PowerPoint presentation, and you're spending, like, four days with Claude, editing how the slide looks, like, probably give up on that.
John Ellis: Okay.
John Ellis: So I gave you some potential solutions, but I mostly just enumerated
John Ellis: all of the things that could go wrong. And so I have tried here to develop a
John Ellis: more of a framework of 6 questions, I think, to ask yourself whenever you're beginning using AI on a project, or using AI for a component, to sort of try to preempt some of these issues. You don't have… so you don't have to correct them, you can sort of ask yourself, like, is AI a good fit for this general?
John Ellis: So the first thing is to be careful about your problem decomposition. So to know exactly what the task is. And this sounds really obvious, but to be honest about, like, how well you really decompose a problem into steps.
John Ellis: If, for instance, you go…
John Ellis: I know now exactly what it is that I need. I have all of the things I think I would need to do it, I can write exactly those steps in order, and the AI just has to do it for me, so that's probably a great fit right off the bat.
John Ellis: I think a lot of things are going to live in the yellows on these slides, which is that it's a little bit of both. Maybe you have a general idea, but you need to iterate on. You know, maybe you're…
John Ellis: putting up a website. I don't know, and like, it's self-explanatory whether a website looks good, but you're not gonna know. Like, you're not gonna be able to specify where a box should go, you know? Just, like, when you see it, you're gonna be like, can you move that over?
John Ellis: that's probably fine. You might want to define some things further, or understand what things are going to be active iteration, but having in your mind, like.
John Ellis: What has to be defined up front? What am I going to actively iterate on?
John Ellis: That's all effort that it's going to take on your part, so just understanding up front what that process is going to look like.
John Ellis: Sometimes you…
John Ellis: are really in this last case very firmly, where, you're kind of just, like, gonna see. Maybe, like.
John Ellis: You're doing some exploratory data analysis, and you have no idea what
John Ellis: you'd actually care about, you don't know the first thing about how the data is organized, like, I don't know, somehow you don't know what you're working with. Probably it's not going to be helpful to just throw AI at a task where you can't even ask what you want out specifically of it.
John Ellis: So you have to be able to, like, be asking for something. What is it that you want to get out? At least as a starting point that you can iterate off of before you go.
John Ellis: A second question to ask is always, what is the baseline? What does good look like? How will I know that a task is complete? And try to figure out what this would look like if, theoretically, there was no AI. So, if I had to go do this task myself, what would I expect to get as an output?
John Ellis: Maybe you find yourself in the green. I know exactly when something is of good quality, I know how long it would take for me to do it right now.
John Ellis: I'm not gonna, like, run into this rabbit hole with AI, then that's great.
John Ellis: A lot of times, again, you'll find yourself in the middle, which maybe I've never done this specific task, but I do understand the domain. Maybe, like, you know, you've never written a code exactly like this, or read research papers on this very specific topic, but you do have a framework for understanding
John Ellis: what you're going into, and you would know if things were going well, if you were getting the information you needed, what questions you want to ask, all that good stuff. Sometimes you might be in the… I don't really have a reference point for what it looks like. If you are just
John Ellis: yeah, asking… sorry, all my exams are coding, it's really the only thing I do. If you're asking it to, generate, like, a webpage for you, or, like, a little app, because you want to, you know, mess around with some visualizations, but you have no idea,
John Ellis: If those visualizations are helpful, or if the webpage is written well, or if it's stealing people's data or something, probably not a good fit for you at this time.
John Ellis: The other critical question is, of course, what is your error tolerance? So…
John Ellis: This goes back to some of our pitfalls. It's always important to define how bad would errors be if they were in there, and how easily do I think I could catch errors? If you think they'll be super obvious when things are going wrong, so our…
John Ellis: dialogic reading, problem set that I mentioned was kind of a great
John Ellis: Example of this, we had experts working on the project, and when they read a question, they just, like.
John Ellis: thumbs up or thumbs down it immediately, right? They go like, yeah, that's good, or like, no, that's weird. It's very obvious when questions are good and bad. We have reviewers who are willing to evaluate them. And, AI is well guardrailed. It's not like our bad questions were to, like, talk hard.
John Ellis: They were just gonna be, like, a little bit weird, and a 3-year-old might not have the wrong answer, and that was probably okay.
John Ellis: So that was kind of a clear green light scenario where things were well defined.
John Ellis: A yellow situation might look like
John Ellis: some of your errors are acceptable, but if they really became systematic, it'd be a big problem. Or maybe, you really don't…
John Ellis: You… some areas would be acceptable because
John Ellis: nothing bad is gonna happen. Maybe the Jesse Golder situation is a great case, where if everybody gets an email to go talk to Jesse Golder, the worst thing is that he's gonna have a few too many conversations. And maybe the harm is relatively low, Jesse.
John Ellis: But of course, there can be cases where an error is catastrophic, and maybe you wouldn't know that a catastrophic error happened, and if it did, it would mess everything up. Big repercussions.
John Ellis: Either evaluate extremely rigorously and define that ahead of time, or don't proceed.
John Ellis: Which then goes into number 4, which is how well can you evaluate?
John Ellis: A tolerance for an error is one thing, but catching them can be an entirely different problem. So, this relates to question three, which is, let's say there are errors, and inevitably things will go wrong.
John Ellis: How easily can I know? Do I have certain tests already that I know need to pass?
John Ellis: could I write tests? It'll take me a while to formalize it, but, like, I do that, it's probably fine. Or if you just wouldn't know, then it's probably not good, because things will go wrong, and if you can't determine that, or define clearly what went wrong and where.
John Ellis: You're getting yourself into a bad situation.
John Ellis: Okay, and then question 5, it's really related, back to that first,
John Ellis: terrible problem, terrible pressure point that plagues me, which is, what are the hidden decisions? As best as you can, I think it's good to keep in mind that the hidden decisions will happen, and to try to formulate what those could possibly be, and how bad they would be.
John Ellis: Hopefully, you're in a position where you can anticipate what major choices will need to be made, or you could evaluate if unanticipated major choices were made. Sometimes, it feels really hard to anticipate what choices will be made, but you would still be able to know
John Ellis: that some bad decision was made, and that's probably also okay. But the situation you don't want to be in is that you're not really sure what AI could assume about the problem.
John Ellis: Probably because you can't specify it 100%, but also you wouldn't know how to know if something went wrong. Probably also because your evaluation is not as rigorous as it needs to be. And so if those things are sort of
John Ellis: feeding on each other into this, like, well, I just won't know if it does something, then that's not good. And I sort of suggest here that probably go back to question one and reformulate what you're trying to do, because
John Ellis: It's probably just not a great task if those two things are sort of beating up on each other, and you can't define them well enough.
John Ellis: To not answer this question.
John Ellis: So, question 6 is really an aggregate of the first 5, which I think is really a framework of, like, a go or do not go, based on how you've answered. And that is getting back to what is the real cost. So.
John Ellis: If you've gone through the evaluation framework and you've decided that, for the most part, AI seems like a great fit, then that's awesome.
John Ellis: Sometimes, you'll be in a situation where, you know, a lot of those yellow flag situations were, okay, well, you're gonna have to spend some time evaluating rigorously. Okay, you're gonna have to spend some time writing really detailed specs. Okay, you're gonna have to spend some time iterating.
John Ellis: at some point, maybe that cost isn't worth it anymore, right? You're gonna spend so much time
John Ellis: writing all of these evaluations and checks and stuff, you could have just done it.
John Ellis: And sometimes that'll be the case.
John Ellis: probably if you had multiple of those red flags, like, there would be a ton of formulation work that has to happen, and so it's just not a great fit for AI at this point.
John Ellis: Okay.
John Ellis: So it might sound like what I'm saying based on all of that, is that if you got green flags, then you're good to use AI. If you got red or yellow flags, then you're not allowed to use AI. Do not go, no AI for you. And that is not what I'm saying. I want to be clear. I think that
John Ellis: The key is that if a portion of your project isn't a good fit, or the whole project.
John Ellis: As one gigantic chunk isn't a good fit, you always have the option to decompose it into smaller parts.
John Ellis: rerun this framework on some smaller part, and I'm sure you can find a part that is small enough that AI can help you with it. Like, seriously, even if 100% of your data pipeline you can't do, except that AI can write a Python script to, like, resize your images, like, that's saving you time.
John Ellis: So, there's probably some little component that is well-specified enough that AI is going to help accelerate you.
John Ellis: And I think it's just about finding what that piece is for your specific use case.
John Ellis: So really that is the true question 7 that I think is important, is really asking yourself, what is a piece that I'm confident AI can help with?
John Ellis: And earlier in this talk, I gave you this analogy of bridges and an ocean, but enough bridges will cross an ocean. So if you just find out what your bridges are, and you take those little steps one at a time, you will build out a full project that maybe feels really out of your scope, if you're able to just specify the steps.
John Ellis: Okay so my final thoughts are largely…
John Ellis: a wrap-up. But just these slides will be in the GitHub, so just as a quick reference guide if you want to reference a few things of exactly what I said. There's a few cases, I think, that are very obvious about when AI tends to disappoint or work well.
John Ellis: that tends to disappoint is believing you have failure across the board in that evaluation framework. Basically, it's just hard to know what the task is that you want to happen. And when AI tends to work well, I think are very obvious cases.
John Ellis: where you're just wanting to, like, do something over and over again, or it's, like, super low stakes, and, you know, you're just chatting with AI, right? Like, that's the extremely low stakes.
John Ellis: version where, like, who cares if it tells you something wrong or whatever? I mean, you know, you should use your brain to know that, but…
John Ellis: it's not gonna be the end of the world.
John Ellis: So there's lots of cases that I think feel very obvious, like, oh, I'll know exactly if this did what it was supposed to be. All my images will now be size 512, like, that's how I'll know it did what it was supposed to be. That's a great case.
John Ellis: The reality, of course, is that lots of things live in the middle ground, where AI can work, but maybe it'll take a lot of effort, expertise.
John Ellis: human evaluation, iteration, you'll have to write some skills, you'll have to verify lots of things. And the question really to ask isn't necessarily if AI can do this, because
John Ellis: as we've seen, and as you probably know, if you throw something at AI, it will do it, whether it's going to do it well or not. So the question is really to ask, is it going to do it well?
John Ellis: at the level I want it to, and actually save me time, what it takes to get to that level.
John Ellis: And what is the piece where that does speak to you?
John Ellis: I think if there's any one sort of…
John Ellis: key takeaway. It's that this idea of evaluation and validation is really the name of the game. It's really hard, I think, to have, like, perfect
John Ellis: trust in AI once you start to see times that it's failed you. But the idea is not to have perfect trust that it's going to do everything right 100% of the time. The idea is for you to be able to understand when it hasn't done right, and just be able to correct it. And so going into every
John Ellis: time that you're using AI for a significant piece, with an idea of the metrics and the scope and the baselines, and what you're going to check to make sure it's all proceeding how it's supposed to, is really the most helpful thing to make sure that things aren't derailing and getting into a space
John Ellis: That's wrong, or that you don't know how to recover.
John Ellis: Okay, and my final analogy, besides the bridge and the ocean, is that, I think you, regardless of how you use AI, have to still think of yourself
John Ellis: as the puzzle solver. AI can literally be every single piece of the puzzle, right? Every bit of your research pipeline, you used AI.
John Ellis: But you as the human still have to know what the puzzle picture is supposed to end up looking like. And that's really your value in all of this.
John Ellis: is that…
John Ellis: you want AI to be more of the pieces, because that's great, and that helps your workflow, but you're still putting the whole thing together. You have the oversight of what it's supposed to look like, of what the final picture is going to all come together as, and that's really, like, invaluable in doing research, of course. And so…
John Ellis: you maybe fall somewhere on the spectrum, I think it really is a spectrum, if you're putting together a puzzle of a research project, and sometimes AI will just be one single piece.
John Ellis: And sometimes you'll be able to collect AI into all of the pieces, but you're still acting as that core role, the manager, the puzzle solver, and do not let it take that away from you, even if it tries.
John Ellis: Okay.
John Ellis: Is that thought of God? Does anyone have a question?
John Ellis: Yeah.
John Ellis: So, question specifically around research and research data, thinking about, like, privacy, confidentiality, and I was…
John Ellis: That seems like that would have a big…
John Ellis: is it ethical for you to use AI to handle this aspect?
John Ellis: Take that. And then…
John Ellis: I did this workshop, there's no, like, don't, you know, don't use confidential data for any of the hands-on projects, because on
John Ellis: uses it for… Doing the AI things.
John Ellis: But then also, doctors are getting to take notes. Are there AI agents?
John Ellis: That are more appropriate.
John Ellis: We're dealing with more central and private data.
John Ellis: Yeah, so that's a great question. The question, was around…
John Ellis: when you have private or secure data that you really do not want to be, yeah, that you're ticking into flaw and giving it out. I mean, there are a lot of
John Ellis: different tactics that you can take, so I'm not an expert on data privacy, and of course, as we said, like, having a conversation with people who are, it's always helpful to understand exactly what you can do. But, I've definitely run into cases before where I maybe don't want to
John Ellis: give AI exactly what my data is, but you could, for instance, give it how your data is structured, and then have it write, like, a code
John Ellis: that works on that data structure, and then you just write… run that code on your data totally offline, and then you can have it write all of the scripts, like the data processing and the validation scripts, because you tell it what you're expecting, but it never sees the data, literally. Like, you go run offline exactly what you're expecting.
John Ellis: There still are kind of careful considerations about that, like.
John Ellis: Can you send an aggregate plot to FOD and then ask it why you're seeing that based on the code it runs, but it's not allowed to see the data? I think that's maybe a nuanced case that I would confirm with BYT.
John Ellis: But,
John Ellis: I think that generally that's a good approach. If you still want to maybe use some of these state-of-the-art tools, but you don't want it to, like, literally see the data, because there's a lot you can do just telling it, kind of, like, what the data looks like, and then never give it access to the actual
John Ellis: Yay.
John Ellis: So, thanks a lot for that. I think it's very relevant today. So, I wanted to ask you about, what you use as a remedy for when that case example was, say, that you did request financing and included something wrong.
John Ellis: Perhaps, do you have a solution that you follow, or is it just a case-by-case basis? And a follow-up to that, just brainstorming, I was thinking about skills.
John Ellis: If a pipeline where you say you give it a specific skill, such as building a supervised mind-suning, then you have all of the skills, so it knows pretty much the exact limitations to follow, that could be also a systematic remedy that you…
John Ellis: Yeah, that's also a great question. And so to summarize again, the question was about, let's say you run into the case that I described with Hansmeet, where it decides to do fine-tuning over the wrong tokens.
John Ellis: What can you do now with this information, to sort of help mitigate it in future instances?
John Ellis: all of that good stuff. And one thing you suggested was a skill, which I think is a great use case for skills.
John Ellis: You know, your particular domain and your particular data and your particular expertise will have these pressure points that it feels like other people aren't running into super often, and so it's a great opportunity to identify things like
John Ellis: or to write things like personalized skills of problems that you were experiencing that maybe other people don't really run into, because, like, exactly what you do with your data and your research is so personal. So skills is a great place. I mean.
John Ellis: Unfortunately, there just is, I think, a…
John Ellis: exploration point, where finding what things it tends to do wrong with your particular domain is gonna…
John Ellis: be a bit of a challenge at the beginning, and then you'll sort of know that, so I know now every time that I write kind of fine-tuning code that it's gonna do that. But it did take, you know, like, that first instance
John Ellis: So I think you've also, like, really good documentation about what you're finding, pain points that you specifically have with your specific domain and data, and maybe you turn those into skills if they sort of are broad enough that that's important, but even just having, like, a running
John Ellis: notes of, like, here are things that I know I have to specify, because I realized once something went wrong that I actually had to specify that. It's just kind of the best way. And, I mean, I guess sharing notes with other people in your domain can really help with that, so,
John Ellis: you know, if I am advising somebody to go write a fine-tuning pipeline, I'm gonna tell them, and be careful to add this note in.
John Ellis: To your spec stuff, because I just know that it'll happen. So sharing your information and your experiences with AI and your best practices, I think, can be super helpful to other people, and it is a great kind of opportunity for that.
John Ellis: Well, thank you so much for, mentioning, of course.
John Ellis: So, this is not fair, you know, we have to spend, you know, spend our time In addition…
John Ellis: I wonder, why are the costs, sharing?
John Ellis: You know, I teach at, the Bandelbridge Community School.
John Ellis: So, you know, as a, theology scholars, our main concern is about, natural resources.
John Ellis: So, this is one of the usual social issues.
John Ellis: So, how much water?
John Ellis: And in minerals, and other natural resources.
John Ellis: should we absorb in order to use, AI.
John Ellis: Have you ever thought about it, and then any data, or any statistics?
John Ellis: It's a… okay, so it's a great question. The question was about, just to repeat, the cost of using AI that is not just a cost to your personal time, or your personal bank accounts, these tools cost money, but a cost to the environment, because every time that you
John Ellis: take an hour drafting an email with blog, there's a real cost, that's happening there.
John Ellis: I… Do not have a super up-to-date
John Ellis: off the top of my mind reference of, like, published numbers. I know that there was a big scandal recently that a bunch of the published numbers people got were just, like, basically lies, or, like, fudged, effectively, to, like.
John Ellis: not really be what they are, so I… I also don't know off the top of my head a very, like, true, number, or the best place to get, like, an objective measure, not, like, OpenAI saying, oh, we promise our water use is really tiny. So…
John Ellis: But I would love to look into that and get back to you if I can find something. So I think it's a great question. I mean, for the purpose of, sort of.
John Ellis: evaluating that side of costs with things, I think it is sort of going back to that point
John Ellis: it's the same evaluation framework, I think, as to whether it's a cost on your time. To consider if the amount of, like, iteration and back and forth and effort that a task is going to take is really worth it for also the cost
John Ellis: That it will cause the world.
John Ellis: You know, if you can anticipate that a task is going to take you 10 hours of back and forth, and you could just do it in 2 minutes, like, then, for everybody's sake, you should not.
John Ellis: proceed to do that task with AI anyway, right? For your own time, for the… for your wallet, for all of it. So I think that identifying
John Ellis: what costs are worth it? And then having that before you begin, just having in your mindset of, like, before you begin a task, let me think about what all is going to go into it, what it's going to take, and just having that as one of those evaluation questions you ask yourself before you start.
John Ellis: It's important. Following up on that question, Dean Spencer-Smith, you told us in a previous session that the real environmental impact is in training the model and not in just using AI.
John Ellis: But are these companies, like, training new models constantly, or…
John Ellis: So the question was, are companies training new models constantly? Yes. So that… so there's still… Yes, there. And that's an absolute conversation that, that we need to be having.
John Ellis: Alright, we are at the end of time. Thank you very much!
John Ellis: Thank God.
John Ellis: We're going to take a break now. We actually have snacks out there, we've got coffee. When we come back, we're going to be taking a look at real-world examples in your academic life and other uses, of real-world use of AI, so we're going to be going through… you're actually going to have a recording of me droning on about my schedule for the last year, trying to find things to put into
John Ellis: my CV. So you're gonna see how I turned that from
John Ellis: droning into a CV properly forming.
John Ellis: In addition to others. And Jesse Bloker is going to be leading this session. All right, see you all back here in about 15 minutes.
John Ellis: Yeah, feel, feel super comfortable. I think I've heard of Elizabeth, I like her feeling, right?
John Ellis: I'm very excited. Sure.
John Ellis: No, not in this case.
John Ellis: It's not talking. No, but, like…
John Ellis: So I joined in these two meetings. I don't see any minute since the,
John Ellis: Yeah, I… there maybe is a link for every session. Yeah, I think that's what I'm gonna have to do. There's so many podcasts now.
John Ellis: I've got the thing with,
John Ellis: So, let's see… well, I can make it a little bit clearer. So, Amanda.
John Ellis: 7 on it.
John Ellis: fascinating narrative.
John Ellis: Nobody knew of its gravity.
John Ellis: ask for, you know, formal, even when we're like.
John Ellis: We're going for it. Well, I teach tomorrow morning. He will be for me, yes. He'll be here for the rest of the day, and in particular with you, he's teacher.
John Ellis: To Moscow, so I can't kept it and left out of it.
John Ellis: Yeah, yeah, I'm sure… Oh, yes, I'll have two short notes.
John Ellis: Oh, I know, I know. That's what we're recording it, so…
John Ellis: Well, so nice to meet you today. Absolutely. Thank you. Hey, honey! Yes, we did! Doing well, thank you. So glad to be here in person. Yeah, no, 7 minutes today.
John Ellis: Okay, so it will be recorded. Absolutely, that's it. It will be recorded, yeah.
John Ellis: You too.
John Ellis: Yes, oh yeah, absolutely. Not so much, but really the process is basically that, and the idea, again, is that.
John Ellis: So get the documentation for…
John Ellis: you know, form. You know, be part of the profile, and you can actually say to the, you know, agent.
John Ellis: dig into the documentation, I had the program installed here, the program was running here. Yes, you have permission to interact. Validate it to make sure that it's working the way. Run this test vehicle that I have.
John Ellis: to validate that it's working correctly. Iterate, you know, change settings, that's easy. But, you know, the AI can actually… so… so these, you know, this looks cool.
John Ellis: But…
John Ellis: you know, to configure this, it's a straight-point box, it's a, you know, it's a special form of Linux from NVIDIA, and there's something sort of a little bit different. In the last one, I actually set up, you know, a Linux box for survival. So, the very first thing that I saw on this was, well.
John Ellis: threshold, since you have access to the full… the entire drop. Now, here are the things to watch.
John Ellis: set up, make sure it's secure, there's a check, you know. So, using a check to make sure the software was running correctly, so then I could do all of the other things at home.
John Ellis: So, there are also basic geeks, as mentioned before, that have the ability to
John Ellis: It was called Puppets here, which actually directly interact with, with, other programs as if they were the…
John Ellis: So that's possible as part of it. For the APIs, we do that when we file, so…
John Ellis: you can sort of explore… that's something where it's extremely well-defined, the behavior of the model… the behavior of the program is extremely well defined. So you can say, make sure it is working… especially when you say.
John Ellis: Now, here's what the program is for. It's almost like a tool within a scale. You would use this when would you use this program? You would use this when? You're the following. You would follow the, you know, you would follow, you would do it in this order, retract data, set the data, extract data, validate in this way.
John Ellis: All of that can be expressed in a scale that's perfect for process knowledge and domain knowledge, and I'm rewind to me a little excuse.
John Ellis: That would be… I mean, that would be something that is very…
John Ellis: So, yeah, it's rolling with you.
John Ellis: Right, which is just… yeah, so I just didn't know if, like, how in this area, if these things could actually…
John Ellis: It can. Ideally, there'd be an… yeah, if there's not an API that's still make it happen, it's just gonna be, alright, it's gonna be looking at the screen and clicking and clicking, but if it's doing that, it can do so alive, and if you're not, it's a win, okay?
John Ellis: Yeah, yeah, that's not… it's very good. I mean, it's like a given one.
John Ellis: never go so again.
John Ellis: There's a lot of skills.
John Ellis: greatly reduced. I never used the blog CLI, so when I was installing it, it was an error when you run just the basic market. Yeah, so I asked the blog about it.
John Ellis: Are we trying… alright, so, is your understanding that we're gonna be, like… I'm on camera, don't like that? So…
John Ellis: Are we maybe gonna be able to all have you guys in the same meeting, and then just, like, change whose screen is being shared? Yeah, probably, that's probably the way to do it. I think so, yeah. Just to avoid a bunch of, like, different hardware swaps. Oh, yeah. That's the one that's being projected. Yes. So it'll just be a matter of, like, whose share you are, like, this one's… which I can be in here for, I don't know, Miguel's do that. Miguel, do you have the
John Ellis: meeting invite for this session? We'll get you added. Yeah, I can send it to my slide. Okay, we'll see.
John Ellis: creating that scaffold yourself, how do I need to be in the invite for a business? Am I speaking to you?
John Ellis: Oh, and what? Keep watching?
John Ellis: So, instead of us flipping on, yeah.
John Ellis: Okay. Yeah, it's fine. I can't blow those off. If you're recording the cloud, we're just gonna chop it up into raw footage.
John Ellis: You are some of the… Whenever you're ready for the meeting ID? Yeah, close up.